---
layout: post
title: "Advent of Code 2021 Day 24: Math loses again"
categories: cs, math
---

_[Advent of Code](https://adventofcode.com/) is a yearly programming challenge involving 25 puzzles, released daily in December. I published all my solutions for 2021 on [GitHub](https://github.com/plra/aoc-2021). I'm featuring some of the more interesting or odd ones in a series of posts._

In [this problem](https://adventofcode.com/2021/day/24) we are asked to simulate an arithmetic logic unit (ALU) over a sequence of assembly-like instructions, e.g. `inp w` for "read an input value and write it to variable `w`" or `div z 3` for "update the variable `z` to `floor(z/3)`." The ALU maintains variables `w`, `x`, `y`, `z`. We must find the lexicographically greatest (or least) sequence of 14 digits $$w_0, \dots, w_{13} \in \{1, \dots, 9\}$$ which, when input to the ALU, leaves `z == 0` after all instructions have been executed.

The input contains 14 segments of instructions with 18 instructions each, all starting with `inp w`. These segments are identical everywhere except in 3 instructions, namely

* 5th instr: `div z a`;
* 6th instr: `add x b`;
* 15th instr: `add y c`;

where `a`, `b`, `c` vary as follows:

$$\begin{align}
a &\in \{1, 26\}; \\
b &\in \begin{cases}
    \{10, \dots, 13\} & \text{if } a = 1, \\
    \{-13, \dots, 0\} & \text{otherwise};
  \end{cases} \\
c &\in \{0, \dots, 16\}.
\end{align}$$

## Approach 1: Math

My initial approach was to formulate the program as a composition of 14 closely related functions. Each segment $$i$$ accepts some input $$w_i$$ and updates the ALU state $$(w, x, y, z)$$ given parameters $$p_i := (a_i, b_i, c_i)$$. We don't actually care what the new value of `w` is, since it is immediately overwritten in the next segment (or we're done, in which case we only care about `z`). Writing $$v_i := (x_i, y_i, z_i)$$; we can characterize each of the 14 instruction segments as functions

$$f_i: (w_i, v_i; p_i) \mapsto v_{i+1}.$$

I wrote some code to simulate the ALU and computed values of $$f_i$$ for all possible values of $$w_i$$ and $$p_i$$ and "a lot" of tuples $$v_i$$. (We're not really doing math, after all.) I quickly noticed that the values of $$x_i$$ and $$y_i$$ had no apparent effect on the output. Begrudgingly peeking at the instruction sequence, I saw that the first instruction involving `x` was always `mul x 0`, wiping whatever we stored in `x` in the previous segment. The same was true for `y`. Hence we may as well dump useless information and reformulate the segment's operation as

$$f_i: (w_i, z_i; p_i) \mapsto z_{i+1};$$

then the output of the entire program is given by

$$f(\mathbf w; \mathbf p) := f_{13}(w_{13}, \dotsm f_1(w_1, f_0(w_0, z_0 = 0; p_0); p_1); \dotsm p_{13})$$

and we need to find vectors $$\mathbf w$$ with $$f(\mathbf w; \mathbf p) = 0$$.

At this point I launched an ill-conceived search for the kernel of $$f$$. I wrote awful code like this:

```py
for w in range(1, 10):
    for z in range(-10, 11):
        for a in [1, 26]:
            for b in range(10, 14) if a == 1 else range(-13, 1):
                for c in range(17):
                    if f_i(w, z, a, b, c) == 0:
                        ker.add((w, z, a, b, c))
```

I drew some plots, none of them six-dimensional. I found some small patterns, like that $$f_i$$ was 0 when $$z + b = w$$, but felt the trail towards a proper understanding of $$f_i$$ running cold. I realized my most useful ideas thus far had come from manually inspecting my specific input, so I decided to scrap the plots and go all in on decompilation.

## Approach 2: Manual decompilation

A generic segment is given below, along with a step-by-step Python translation:

```py
inp w     w = input()
mul x 0   x = 0
add x z   x += z
mod x 26  x %= 26
div z a   z //= a
add x b   x += b
eql x w   x = int(x == w)
eql x 0   x = int(x == 0)
mul y 0   y = 0
add y 25  y += 25
mul y x   y *= x
add y 1   y += 1
mul z y   z *= y
mul y 0   y = 0
add y w   y += w
add y c   y += c
mul y x   y *= x
add z y   z += y
```

Or, compressed into more readable Python,

```py
w = input()
relation = z % 26 + b == w
z //= a
if not relation:
    z = 26 * z + w + c
```

The number `26` occurs in 2 places (really 3, since `a` is either `1` or `26`) --- let's think of `z` as a base-26 number. In this view, `relation` is `True` exactly if the last digit of `z` matches `w - b`. Then, if `a == 26` we pop a digit off of `z`; else, `a == 1` and we do nothing. Finally, if `relation` was `False`, we append the digit `w + c` to `z`.

Initially `z == 0`, i.e. it has "zero digits" in base-26. We need `z` to also have zero digits upon termination.

* **Case 1: `a == 1`.** Notice in this case that `relation` is always `False` since `b > 9`, but we require each `w <= 9` as well. Since `z //= 1` is a no-op, in each of these 7 cases we add a digit to `z`, namely `w + c`.
* **Case 2: `a == 26`.** In this case `b` is always nonpositive, so `relation` may or may not hold. In this case we always lop off a digit from `z`, but if `relation` is `False` we add another digit right back.

Actual values of `(a, b, c)` for each segment and their interpretations are given below:

```py
0:  (1, 11, 1)      # add digit w0 + 1 to z
1:  (1, 10, 10)     # add digit w1 + 10 to z
2:  (1, 13, 2)      # ...
3:  (26, -10, 5)    # add digit w3 + 5 to z if relation, else pop digit from z
4:  (1, 11, 6)      # ...
5:  (1, 11, 0)
6:  (1, 12, 16)
7:  (26, -11, 12)
8:  (26, -7, 15)
9:  (1, 13, 7)
10: (26, -13, 6)
11: (26, 0, 5)
12: (26, -11, 6)
13: (26, 0, 15)
```

There are 7 tuples each with `a == 1` and `a == 26`. Since `z` must have "zero digits" at the end, and we know the `a == 1` tuples will add 7 digits, we need `relation` to hold in each `a == 26` tuple such that those segments only remove digits from `z`. This reduces the problem to a system of 7 equations, where we track digit additions and deletions across segments as if `z` were a stack:

$$\begin{align}
w_0 + 1 &= w_{13} \\
w_1 + 10 &= w_{12} + 11 \\
w_2 + 2 &= w_3 + 10 \\
w_4 + 6 &= w_{11} \\
w_5 &= w_8 + 7 \\
w_6 + 16 &= w_7 + 11 \\
w_9 + 7 &= w_{10} + 13
\end{align}$$

Finding the lexicographically greatest $$\mathbf w$$ is then a matter of choosing the solution to this system with the highest possible most significant digits, e.g.

$$\begin{align}
w_0 + 1 = w_{13} &\implies w_0 = 8, w_{13} = 9; \\
w_1 + 10 = w_{12} + 11 &\implies w_1 = 9, w_{12} = 8; \\
&\dotsm
\end{align}$$

which yields the solution for part 1

$$89913949293989$$

and, doing the opposite to find the lexicographically least $$\mathbf w$$ for part 2,

$$12911816171712.$$
